Add `ydb sql` documentation and update links to use new command where possible (#15262)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/reference/ydb-cli/parameterized-query-execution.md

| `--input-binary-strings` | Input binary strings encoding format. Sets how binary strings in the input should be interterpreted.<br/>Available options:<ul><li>`unicode`: Every byte in binary strings that is not a printable ASCII symbol (codes 32-126) should be encoded as [UTF-8]{% if lang == "ru" %}(https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8){% endif %}{% if lang == "en" %}(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8){% endif %}.</li><li>`base64`: Binary strings should be fully encoded with base64.</li></ul> |

> If values are specified for all the parameters [in the `DECLARE` clause](../../yql/reference/syntax/declare.md), the query will be executed on the server. If a value is absent for at least one parameter, the command fails with the "Missing value for parameter" message.

Author: It is described just as it works: If values are specified for all parameters, the query will be executed. If a parameter value is absent, server will return an error. CLI will not send nulls for `DECLARE`d parameters without provided values.

> Also, parameters can be `Optional<T>`; thus, it should be ok for them to be absent
May be, then there will be no error from server. I'll add "if the values are specified for all non-optional parameters..."

| `--input-columns` | String with column names that replaces CSV/TSV header. Relevant when passing parameters in CSV/TSV format only. It is assumed that there is no header in the file. |
| `--input-skip-rows` | Number of CSV/TSV header rows to skip in the input data (not including the row of column names, if `--header` option is used). Relevant when passing parameters in CSV/TSV format only. |
| `--input-batch` | The batch mode applied to parameter sets on `stdin` or `--input-file`.<br/>Available options:<br/>
<ul>
<li>`iterative` (default): Executes the query for each parameter set (exactly one execution when `no-framing` is specified for `--input-framing`)</li>
<li>`full`: Executes the query with all parameter sets wrapped in json list every time EOF is reached on stdin</li>
<li>`adaptive`: Executes the query with a json list of parameter sets every time when its number reaches `--input-batch-max-rows`, or the waiting time reaches `--input-batch-max-delay`</li>
</ul> |
| `--input-batch-max-rows` | Maximum size of list for input adaptive batching mode (default: 1000) |

> | `--input-batch-max-delay` | Maximum delay to process first item in the list for `adaptive` batching mode (default: 1s) |

Author: Any, actually. Like us, ms, s, h, d, w. But only seconds are relevant for this option. May be ms. I'll add some explanations

</ul> |

{% note warning %}

When using a newline character as a separator between the parameter sets, make sure that it isn't used inside the parameter sets. Putting some text value in quotes does not enable newlines within the text. Multiline JSON documents are not allowed.

{% endnote %}

### Example {#example-streaming-iterate}

#### Streaming processing of multiple parameter sets {#example-iterate}

{% list tabs %}

- JSON

  Suppose you need to run your query three times, with the following sets of values for the `a` and `b` parameters:

  1. `a` = 10, `b` = 20
  2. `a` = 15, `b` = 25
  3. `a` = 35, `b` = 48

  Let's create a file that includes lines with JSON representations of these sets:

  ```bash
  echo -e '{"a":10,"b":20}\n{"a":15,"b":25}\n{"a":35,"b":48}' > par1.txt
  cat par1.txt
  ```

  Command output:

  ```text
  {"a":10,"b":20}
  {"a":15,"b":25}
  {"a":35,"b":48}
  ```

  Let's execute the query by passing the content of this file to `stdin`, formatting the output as JSON:

  ```bash
  cat par1.txt | \
  {{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql \
    -s 'DECLARE $a AS Int64;
        DECLARE $b AS Int64;
        SELECT $a + $b' \
    --input-framing newline-delimited \

>     --format json-unicode

Author: Why? The `cat` option with pipe is much more readable in my opinion. Our goal is to make these examples understandable for more people, not to minimize the number of commands

  40
  83
  ```

  Or just by passing input file name to `--input-file` option:

  ```bash
  {{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql \
    -s 'DECLARE $a AS Int64;
        DECLARE $b AS Int64;
        SELECT $a + $b' \
    --input-file par1.txt \
    --input-format csv \
    --input-framing newline-delimited \
    --format csv
  ```

  Command output:

  ```text
  30
  40
  83
  ```

  This output can be passed as input to the next query command with .

- TSV

  Suppose you need to run your query three times, with the following sets of values for the `a` and `b` parameters:

  1. `a` = 10, `b` = 20
  2. `a` = 15, `b` = 25
  3. `a` = 35, `b` = 48

  Let's create a file that includes lines with TSV representations of these sets:

  ```bash
  echo -e 'a\tb\n10\t20\n15\t25\n35\t48' > par1.txt
  cat par1.txt
  ```

  Command output:

  ```text
  a  b
  10 20
  15 25
  35 48
  ```

  Let's execute the query by passing the content of this file to `stdin`, formatting the output as TSV:

  ```bash
  cat par1.txt | \
  {{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql \
    -s 'DECLARE $a AS Int64;
        DECLARE $b AS Int64;
        SELECT $a + $b' \
    --input-format tsv \
    --input-framing newline-delimited \

>     --format tsv

Author: Same thing as above. I find your option more complicated to understand

  --input-param-name x \
  --input-batch full
```

Command output:

```text
┌─────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
| column0 | column1                                           |
├─────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
| 3       | [{"a":10,"b":20},{"a":15,"b":25},{"a":35,"b":48}] |
└─────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Examples: Adaptive batch processing {#example-batch-adaptive}

#### Limiting the maximum data processing delay {#example-adaptive-delay}

This example demonstrates the adaptive batching triggered by a processing delay. In the first line of the command below, we generate 1,000 rows at a delay of 0.2 seconds on `stdout` and pipe them to `stdin` to the `ydb sql` query execution command. The  query execution command shows the parameter batches in each subsequent query call.

```bash
for i in $(seq 1 1000);do echo "Line$i";sleep 0.2;done | \
{{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql \
  -s 'DECLARE $x AS List<Utf8>;
      SELECT ListLength($x), $x' \
  --input-framing newline-delimited \
  --input-format raw \
  --input-param-name x \
  --input-batch adaptive
```

> Command output (actual values may differ):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Command output (the actual values may differ):
```

├─────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
| 14      | ["Line1","Line2","Line3","Line4","Line5","Line6","Line7","Line8","Line9","Line10","Line11","Line12","Line13","Line14"] |
└─────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
┌─────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
| column0 | column1                                                 |
├─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
| 6       | ["Line15","Line16","Line17","Line18","Line19","Line20"] |
└─────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
┌─────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
| column0 | column1                                                 |
├─────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
| 6       | ["Line21","Line22","Line23","Line24","Line25","Line26"] |
└─────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
^C
```

> The first batch includes all the rows accumulated at the input while the database connection has had been establishing, that's why it's larger than the next ones.
> 
> You can terminate the command by Ctrl+C or wait 200 seconds until the input generation is finished.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first batch includes all the rows accumulated at the input while the database connection was being established, which is why it is larger than the subsequent ones.

You can terminate the command using Ctrl+C or wait 200 seconds until the input generation is finished.
```

> #### Limit on the number of records {#example-adaptive-limit}
> 
> This example demonstrates the adaptive batching triggered by a number of parameter sets. In the first line of the command below, we generate 200 rows. The command will show parameter batches in each subsequent query call, applying the given limit `--input-batch-max-rows` of 20 (the default limit is 1,000).
> 
> In this example, we also demonstrate the option to join parameters from different sources and generate JSON at the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Limit on the number of records {#example-adaptive-limit}

This example demonstrates adaptive batching triggered by the number of parameter sets. In the first line of the command below, we generate 200 rows. The command displays parameter batches in each subsequent query call, applying the specified limit `--input-batch-max-rows` of 20 (the default limit is 1,000).

This example also demonstrates the option to join parameters from different sources and generate JSON as output.
```

```bash

> for i in $(seq 1 200);do echo "Line$i";done | \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seq 1 200 | sed 's/^/Line/' | \
```

Author: This is also far less readable. Everybody understands what `for` cycle and `echo` command do. Almost nobody remembers how `seq` and especially `sed` work

      DECLARE $p2 AS Int64;
      SELECT ListLength($x) AS count, $p2 AS p2, $x AS items' \
  --input-framing newline-delimited \
  --input-format raw \
  --input-param-name x \
  --input-batch adaptive \
  --input-batch-max-rows 20 \
  --param '$p2=10' \
  --format json-unicode
```

Command output:

```text
{"count":20,"p2":10,"items":["Line1","Line2","Line3","Line4","Line5","Line6","Line7","Line8","Line9","Line10","Line11","Line12","Line13","Line14","Line15","Line16","Line17","Line18","Line19","Line20"]}
{"count":20,"p2":10,"items":["Line21","Line22","Line23","Line24","Line25","Line26","Line27","Line28","Line29","Line30","Line31","Line32","Line33","Line34","Line35","Line36","Line37","Line38","Line39","Line40"]}
...
{"count":20,"p2":10,"items":["Line161","Line162","Line163","Line164","Line165","Line166","Line167","Line168","Line169","Line170","Line171","Line172","Line173","Line174","Line175","Line176","Line177","Line178","Line179","Line180"]}
{"count":20,"p2":10,"items":["Line181","Line182","Line183","Line184","Line185","Line186","Line187","Line188","Line189","Line190","Line191","Line192","Line193","Line194","Line195","Line196","Line197","Line198","Line199","Line200"]}
```

> #### Deleting multiple records from a {{ ydb-short-name }} table based on primary keys {#example-adaptive-delete-pk}
> 
> {% include [not_allow_for_olap_note](../../_includes/not_allow_for_olap_note.md) %}
> 
> This example shows how you can delete an unlimited number of records from {{ ydb-short-name }} tables without risking exceeding the limit on the number of records per transaction.
> 
> Let's create a test table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Deleting multiple records from a {{ ydb-short-name }} table based on primary keys {#example-adaptive-delete-pk}

{% include [not_allow_for_olap_note](../../_includes/not_allow_for_olap_note.md) %}

This example demonstrates how to delete an unlimited number of records from {{ ydb-short-name }} tables without exceeding the limit on the number of records per transaction.

Let's create a test table:
```

```bash

> {{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql -s 'create table test_delete_1( id UInt64 not null, primary key (id))'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql -s 'CEREATE TABLE test_delete_1(id UInt64 NOT NULL, PRIMARY KEY (id));'
```

```

Add 100,000 records to it:

```bash

> for i in $(seq 1 100000);do echo "$i";done | \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seq 1 100000 | \
```

{{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart import file csv -p test_delete_1
```

> Delete all records with ID > 10:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete all records with `id` greater than 10:
```

```bash
{{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql \
  -s 'SELECT t.id FROM test_delete_1 AS t WHERE t.id > 10' \
  --format json-unicode | \
{{ ydb-cli }} -p quickstart sql \
  -s 'DECLARE $lines AS List<Struct<id:UInt64>>;

>       DELETE FROM test_delete_1 WHERE id IN (SELECT tl.id FROM AS_TABLE($lines) AS tl)' \

Reviewer: This requires extra explanation on why this is so much hassle and not just `DELETE FROM test_delete_1 WHERE id > 10;`

  --input-framing newline-delimited \
  --input-param-name lines \
  --input-batch adaptive \
  --input-batch-max-rows 10000
```

#### Processing of messages read from a topic {#example-adaptive-pipeline-from-topic}

Examples of processing messages read from a topic are given in [{#T}](topic-pipeline.md#example-read-to-yql-param).

> ## See also {#see-also}

Reviewer: Do we already have parametrized queries in the PostgreSQL-compatibility mode? If so, I'd also add a link to it here.

Author: I have no answer for this question. Technically we have a hidden `--syntax` option where we can specify `pg` syntax. And we can pass parameters the same way we do for `yql` syntax. But I don't know if it would really work

> #### Processing of messages read from a topic {#example-adaptive-pipeline-from-topic}
> 
> Examples of processing messages read from a topic are given in [{#T}](topic-pipeline.md#example-read-to-yql-param).
> 
> ## See also {#see-also}
> 
> * [Parameterized queries in {{ ydb-short-name }} SDK](../ydb-sdk/parameterized_queries.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Processing messages read from a topic {#example-adaptive-pipeline-from-topic}

Examples of processing messages read from a topic are provided in [{#T}](topic-pipeline.md#example-read-to-yql-param).

## See also {#see-also}

* [Parameterized queries in {{ ydb-short-name }} SDK](../ydb-sdk/parameterized_queries.md)
```
